where do ideas come from I had an idea
earlier today I thought to myself having
compared the mind to a kind of
Singularity from whence ideas come I
really should try to explain myself a
little further I said in a podcast
recently titled Epi phenomena where I
considered the nature of Consciousness
and its possible relationship to
explanatory creativity you can find that
episode by the way on YouTube or go to
the sub stack article where I link to it
what I said there in that episode was
let me quote myself quote what I am
saying is we people are the equivalent
of a kind of Singularity from one
Singularity came all of existence
apparently
but from others come ideas from The
Singularity that existed at the moment
of the Big Bang came everything what if
the analog of a singularity exists in
the mind of a person and this initiates
ideas if a black hole were a naked
Singularity perhaps TV sets could come
out of them so it has been said and the
reason because the regular laws of
physics as we understand them break down
inside singularities our understanding
of causation fails TV sets may as well
come out of such things therefore
because regular laws of physics do not
seem to apply
very well so what if people are the only
real naked singularities what if TV sets
can come out of people after all in
truth they did TV sets came from the
imaginations of people it's either that
which at least explains something or
television sets came from the first
Singularity that which inflated and
expanded at the moment of creation from
that big bang event came hydrogen Stars
galaxies planets and eventually people
in television sets so television sets do
indeed come from singularities whether
it's the big bang or something in the
mind of a person make your choice
but one of those is merely predictive
the other at least has a chance of being
explanatory end quote
since I wrote recorded and published
that multiple viewers and listeners have
taken my remarks not as the analogies or
metaphors I thought I was expressing but
as literal explanations they are not I
rarely provide good explanations of
things like Consciousness creativity
free will or anything of that sort
because I do not think we have good
explanations of any of those things yet
I have some hazy conjectures at best
that the idea that ideas come from
something like a singularity was one of
those hazy conjectures a naked
Singularity if it exists in physics is a
place where the laws of physics
themselves break down so it is said or
rather we should say our knowledge of
the laws of physics theories including
general relativity and quantum theory
break down and hence we cannot give a
good account in physical terms of things
like what causes what or what is
expected to happen next in other words
we are unable to make predictions as our
dynamical laws as we understand them
fail us in such a place a naked
Singularity the universe itself all of
physical reality may have come from a
naked Singularity of this kind again go
to the sub stack article for links on
all of this stuff namely a naked
Singularity is a state of physical
reality that lies Beyond general
relativity and quantum theory in terms
of those theories being able to account
for such things
and hence the best we can say in terms
of those theories is we do not know what
caused the universe our laws of physics
as we currently understand them cannot
predict the universe coming into being
and I get Singularity therefore could
give rise to the whole universe
everything
as David Deutsch writes in the beginning
of Infinity on page 175
quote as Hawking once Put It television
sets could come out of a naked
Singularity end quote
he Deutsch then goes on to say in
essence that there is no reason to think
the Big Bang was a singularity of that
sort but rather something more benign in
any case singularities naked or
otherwise are bizarre phenomena if it's
true that the universe itself came from
a naked Singularity and if Hawking is
correct that from a naked Singularity we
may as well expect anything to come
television sets or whatnot then if we
look at a place where television sets
really do come namely the imagination of
people I was speculating that perhaps
the Mind contains within it something
analogous to a naked Singularity or
perhaps a singularity of some kind
perhaps maybe again of some kind but I
don't know this is all rather wild
speculation so perhaps I should be a
little more precise then and see
speaking in riddles and analogies in in
any case I had the idea I should explain
all this a little more now we had that
idea of mine come from and where are
these ideas I am typing out right now or
indeed speaking to you about right now
coming from my mind obviously me in
other words but where in me and how in
other words in the most General case let
me ask where do ideas come from if it's
not literal singularities in the mind
then where let us first take a step back
and ask what we're even talking about
what even is well an idea is a
conjecture it's a guess it may be an
attempt to say something that might be
true
or it could be an attempt to say
something false or to deceive that is a
lie
or it could be an attempt to say
something useful or beautiful or an
attempt to say something useless mean
insulting or cruel and so on this is to
say it may be explicit in part in other
words expressable in language or it may
be largely inexplicent not properly
expressable in language yet because we
don't know how like for example the idea
of how it feels to be weightless or
falling for a moment a sensation many
can recall at will yet not easily
describable to someone who's never felt
that or for example what the color green
looks like if you're trying to describe
this say to a blind person ideas can
come to us for many reasons and often
unbidden but not always one can sit and
reflect upon a problem and ideas
sometimes Pleasant or useful can more
readily come when we are not distracted
or concerned or fearful some ideas for
some of us come best when we're walking
or in silence rather than sitting in a
noisy place especially those kind of
ideas we find most important to us
namely solutions to our problems what to
do next how to get past this particular
predicament an idea therefore is a kind
of guess and it may be a kind of
knowledge but not all knowledge counts
as an idea nor vice versa how are
guesses and knowledge and ideas and
similar concepts related I do not think
this field is a Precision science or
indeed Philosophy for that matter just
yet but the diagram in the accompanying
sub stack article may be of use to at
least some degree in summarizing a part
of epistemology as I understand it and
best explained by David Deutsch
following on from the work mainly
initiated by Carl popper with some
supplementary editions by Richard
Dawkins among other people if you've got
access to the diagram and you're looking
at it
I wish to emphasize that the diagram is
not supposed to be either definitive nor
exhaustive merely informative to some
extent as a hint to how some of these
epistemological Notions are distinct yet
related for one thing there are many
more categories we could apply the
explicit and implicit versus inexplicit
distinctions in knowledge rational
versus anti-rational memes and so on
also worthy of note I am simply taking
so-called papyrian epistemology to be
epistemology the study of the creation
and growth of knowledge in much the same
way a physicist just takes quantum
physics to be physics the study of
energy and matter and so on this is not
to say that in either case popular in
epistemology or quantum physics that all
has been explained or there are not deep
Mysteries left to unravel of course
there are but it is to say we've moved
on Beyond certain other ideas years that
have been shown false and flawed for
example in epistemology induction
Justified true belief confidence levels
subjective feelings and so on all of
that stuff that forms a part of other
kinds of epistemology in much the same
way we have moved Beyond Newtonian
classical mechanics and classical
electrodynamics as being a literal
explanation of how motion gravity and
energy works or indeed how neo-darwinism
has replaced creationism that might be a
better analogy actually in fact that is
more than an analogy indeed it is for
this reason I have deliberately avoided
categories like belief or Justified
truth or probable assertion and so on
those things don't appear in my diagram
I think all of those and related ideas
or synonymous Concepts they're entirely
misconceived they're not a part of
epistemology so they're not on my
diagram so let's look a little bit more
closely at what I'm trying to picture
here for the purpose of figuring out
what ideas are and therefore where they
come from we're going to consider the
various intersections and complements of
knowledge with ideas what is common to
all instances of ideas is that they are
abstractions which is to say they could
in principle be communicated and
represented in various physical forms or
to be a little more precise still an
idea like knowledge can be said to be
independent of its physical substrate
we humans have ideas and they are in our
minds represented as patterns of
neuronal firings
we don't have any good explanations as
to precisely how this works in a brain
we can write down our ideas however as
incont paper or speak them as I'm doing
right now vibrations we call sound in
the air we can represent them as pixels
on a screen which might be how you're
reading this if you're looking at the
sub stack article patterns of light and
dark
the idea is not identical to for example
ink on paper or for that matter neuronal
firings and so on
these are just ways of representing
those ideas for my purposes I shall say
an idea is an abstraction that captures
possibility so let's zoom in and explain
parts of this diagram and let me start
as I admonish anyone interested in
epistemology to do with science
it is no accident I've put science and
related intellectual Pursuits like
mathematics and morality and so on at
the heart of my diagram here it's inside
the green circle there we must start
here as people interested in
epistemology four if epistemology is to
serve us any purpose at all it is to
serve the purpose of solving problems in
the real world and the real world is the
business of science as well as
mathematics morality economics
philosophy and so on namely all those
other subjects epistemology is not done
in the abstract or by considering Trope
examples of whether tables exist or what
the nature of perceptions are it is to
consider how knowledge is created and to
understand that we should look to
science as the preeminent example of
where knowledge is being created so
let's not merely imagine what goes on in
the abstract let us use the tools of
science and reason upon science itself
to explain what it is that we observe to
be going on there we have a problem
how did we devise theories of the atom
or of gravity or the diversity of
species or how rocks form and so on how
did we move from any one of the theories
about those things to something else how
do we go from The Plum Pudding model of
the atom to the modern Quantum ID or
from the Newtonian force of gravity to
Einstein's curved space time or from
Biblical style creationism to evolution
by natural selection those are real
problems of how we move from one
explanation to a better explanation by
correcting errors in what we say exists
in the real world and as a side effect
allowing us sometimes in some places to
predict what's going to happen next that
is the center of the bullseye maybe I
should have colored it red
okay so I've labeled that part of the
diagram with the letter a and a labels
ideas that are good explanations so they
all count as not merely ideas but
knowledge
if they are explanations of reality
these are also memes as they go on to
get replicated not all scientific
knowledge counts as a good explanation
by the way
especially in light of it being refuted
so Newtonian gravity it counts as an
explanation it's knowledge and it's a
meme it gets replicated but it's not a
good explanation of gravity given what
we know about general relativity and
observations like gravitational waves
and eddington's experiment and so on and
so forth which Newton's theory of
gravity cannot account for therefore it
can't possibly be a good explanation of
those things but general relativity can
be let's move on to the part of the
diagram label to be
here we're considering the region
bounded by the red circle but is outside
the green circle in other words good
explanations that are not scientific
moral philosophical and so on
good explanations can be just good
explanations of let's say who one's
family members are or how a certain
dance is best performed some good
explanations like where you left your
keys won't count as memes though they
are knowledge and the reason for that is
well they don't get replicated so
although you know where you left your
keys you're never going to tell anyone
else and so you might very well forget
the next day where you left your keys
the day before and so on it goes not all
knowledge counts as being something that
is going to be replicated so it's not
mimetic let's look at the part of the
diagram of labeled C here we've got the
intersection of knowledge and ideas and
I'm calling that memes or another way of
saying that is that memes are ideas that
go on to get replicated many memes are
not as I've just said good explanations
they could just be cultural behaviors
for example idea is and knowledge yes
but not explanatory in any sense even if
there are explanations for those things
jokes might fit into this category as
well songs works of fiction art of the
kind that becomes popular to some extent
and so on some memes are rational they
propagate by making use of the critical
faculties of their holders and some are
anti-rational they propagate by
disabling the critical faculties of
their holders but that distinction
notice doesn't feature in my crude
representation of these categories in
any case anti-rational memes May often
be a form of inexplicit knowledge the
holder just won't know they even hold
them the fear of criticizing some idea
might run very deep well below conscious
awareness let's look at the part of the
diagram label D now
D is the region where it's knowledge
that is not a good explanation and is
not mimetic it can be things you know
that in fact aren't so at all and you
might never communicate them for example
you might be superstitious let's say and
you think wearing your lucky Red Socks
on the day you plan to propose to your
sweetheart really is the reason that he
or she says yes or even comes to factor
in the explanation as to why they've
said yes at all
or perhaps your lucky Red Socks are the
reason you never got covered and so on
you might say you believe in the power
of your lucky red socks or of prayer you
know it and yet it's false kind of like
Newtonian gravity but unlike Newtonian
gravity fails to actually solve any
problem it also never gets copied and
passed on to another mind so it doesn't
count as a meme and finally the part of
the diagram labeled e here we have ideas
you have that don't count as knowledge
that you never think are true or useful
but uh simply guesses that appear in
Consciousness only to be immediately or
almost immediately refuted for example
or at least eventually refuted like for
example uh I left my keys on the kitchen
counter that could be an idea you have
that might be immediately refuted by
observation but they are in fact in your
pocket after all so that guess the idea
you have is not knowledge and it's not a
meme nor a good explanation it's just a
random idea that turns out to be false
and you'll immediately figure out it's
false okay so that's the way in which I
think knowledge and gases and ideas and
memes and so on are kind of related in
the papyrian view but are we getting any
closer to figuring out where ideas come
from or what ideas are
well the classic philosophers from the
17th and 18th century Chief among them
for my purposes right now Descartes
Rene Descartes a manual cart and David
Hume in fact they're just emblematic of
many of those classic philosophers of
that era from both the British and
Continental Enlightenment they were all
most concerned about ideas more so than
knowledge
my business is of course usually to
write and speak about knowledge and its
creation that's the reason for the
podcast after all the theory of
knowledge cast podcast but knowledge
technically is a separate thing again
look at the diagram knowledge on my view
I'm borrowing directly from Chiara
myletto who herself is following in the
footsteps of David Deutsch himself of
course in the lineage of Carl Poppa who
likewise followed from xenophanese of
colophon who lived from 570 to 478 BC
what we think and what I'm saying
knowledge is again from marletto is
resilient information
resilient here captures the quality of
getting itself copied through error
identification and correction over time
and remaining instantiated in some
physical substrate
this getting itself copied property
happens precisely because something
people generally find that information
useful hence it counts as knowledge what
makes the information useful
well that information solves some
problem and so long as that information
continues to solve some problem it will
continue to get copied and transmitted
whether explicitly or indeed without a
knower being present Papa's deep Insight
like for example in a book or more
abstractly and implicitly still in an
object my favorite examples are
telescopes which can be reverse
engineered by some intelligent creature
to reveal the knowledge contained within
of how to collect focus and magnify
light coming from an object a telescope
really contains that knowledge or indeed
a computer which instantiates the
knowledge so we say of laws of physics
which allow for calculation or
computation to occur and whose circuits
transistors capacitors can have
represented in them as for example
electrical potential energy information
in the form of binary digits which
correctly interpreted can be understood
as likewise containing knowledge so in
summary knowledge is useful information
it can be called useful because it
solves some problem and because it is
useful it tends to get itself copied or
in other words once instantiated in a
physical substrate tends to cause itself
to remain so or in other words it is
resilient so that's knowledge on maletto
Deutsche and Popper's view but what
about ideas they cannot be the same as
knowledge because not all ideas are
useful proper Deutsch and maletto all
refer to ideas or repeatedly throughout
their work but their focus like mine is
rather more often on knowledge after all
it is those ideas that count as
knowledge in particular explanatory
knowledge that transform the world to
borrow a part of the subtitle of the
beginning of Infinity but if I wish to
attempt an answer to the question where
do ideas come from
I had best refined what I mean by idea
in at least something like the way I
just did with knowledge there but as I
say malato Deutsche and popper do not
refine idea in the way they do with
knowledge and for good reason
knowledge is the really important stuff
but other thinkers throughout the ages
in particular philosophers
have been focused on what this word IDE
is all about
Descartes for example in his profound
work meditations on first philosophy
published in 1641 following the
tradition of which he and his
contemporaries were apart spoke of
certain ideas as being clear and
distinct he wrote
such ideas he thought could not possibly
be false so a clear and distinct idea of
himself
for example was something he thought
that couldn't possibly have an error
contained within it
so he wrote for example quoting
Descartes here quote because I know
certainly that I exist and that
meanwhile I do not remark that any other
thing necessarily pertains to my nature
or Essence accepting that I am a
thinking thing I rightly conclude that
my Essence consists solely in the fact
that I am a thinking thing or a
substance whose whole essence or nature
is to think and although possibly or
rather certainly As I Shall say in a
moment I possess a body with which I am
very intimately conjoined yet because on
the one side I have a clear and distinct
idea of myself in as much as I am only a
thinking an unextended thing and as on
the other I possess a distinct idea of
body in as much as it is only an
extended and unthinking thing it is
certain that this eye that is to say my
soul all by which I am what I am is
entirely and absolutely distinct from my
body and can exist without it end quote
which as we can see there in the light
of modern physics of computation and
epistemology of personhood he's quite
right about almost all of that except
for this desire to be certain of it all
and this certainty is in some way
established by the so-called clearness
and distinctness of the idea that he
holds in his mind
he desires certainty because his view
Descartes view of knowledge and
epistemology is to have a solid
foundation on which to build the rest of
the totally reliable edifice of
knowledge
he's not alone in this tradition even
through to today people want certainly
true axioms and certainly true rules of
inference allowing them to infer the
juice or conclude certainly true
knowledge as consequences logically
implied and as certain as those axioms
one began with it's not about problem
solving so much as proving true what One
Believes or thinks it's all very
dogmatic yet still Descartes is correct
that what he as a person is is a
thinking thing and that he could indeed
exist distinct from his body and could
exist without it this in modern
Parliament is just a consequence of
substrate Independence substrate
Independence of the Mind in this
particular case Descartes got there by
reasoning this through from rather
dubious premises we can get there now as
a matter of good explanations namely we
as people are thinking things and what
it means to think is that we have a mind
that runs on the brain but is not
identical to the brain the former the
mind is a special kind of software
running on the hardware that is the
brain but all of that is by the buyer
for what animates my present discussion
here
what is an idea Descartes offers little
by way of explanation here but perhaps
he touches Upon Our question as to where
ideas come from later on in his
meditations where he writes and again
bear with me because it's written in the
rather obscure style to which
philosophers of his era were fond
Descartes writes quote there is
certainly further in me a certain
passive faculty of perception that is of
receiving and recognizing the ideas of
sensible things but this would be
useless to me and I could in no way
Avail myself of it if there were not
either in me or in some other thing
another active faculty capable of
forming and producing these ideas but
this active faculty cannot exist in me
in as much as I am a thing that thinks
saying that it does not presuppose
thought and also that those ideas are
often produced in me without my
contributing in any way to the same and
often even against my will it is thus
necessarily the case that the faculty
resides in some substance different from
me in which all the reality which is
objectively in the ideas that are
produced by this faculty is formally or
eminently contained as I remarked before
end quote so what's he saying here well
there he is admitting that there is
something in him which he's calling
quote an active faculty capable of
forming and producing these ideas end
quote
which come from quote a certain passive
faculty of perception end quote so here
Descartes saying he thinks perception is
passive in other words no interpretation
is needed you just perceive in a rather
unproblematic way it's a lot of modern
philosophers that think that way too
but this happens to be a problem for
anyone who wants to account for things
like optical illusions or indeed just
hallucinations that people have what we
think we perceive just might not be so
never mind what idea we then go on to
form about that first sense impression
what we are are Minds those minds are
connected to senses via nerves and who
knows what neurons might fire or nerves
might go Haywire to deliver us a
perception apparently of something that
just isn't there we cannot ever rule out
this possibility entirely and thus we
should remain fallibleists who
understand that we are guessing at the
world and always interpreting the
apparent contents of our minds we may
guess reliably well and come to solve
our problems some of the time but none
of that ever confers certainty which is
Descartes mistake his mistake is the
error of mistaking some good though
possibly false explanations for certain
truth he's confusing good explanations
for certain truth he just could not
imagine how he could possibly be wrong
about some things like his own existence
and on that basis his lack of
imagination he thought he proved himself
infallible at times on some topics at
least and he's not alone in that
whatever the case Descartes reached the
unsurprising conclusion that ideas
originate within him and sometimes
against his will very well and there's
little to quibble with there let's move
on to a manual cart can't in his
celebrated critique of pure reason which
by the way is a book that Karl Popper
himself praised as being a great advance
in epistemology for its almost but not
quite outline of his own critical
rationalist philosophy
can't likewise cannot tell us where
ideas come from but in the second part
of his vast Tome titled division two
transcendental dialectic he does right
in a chapter titled
on the ideas in general before he gets
to specifics on his more major topic
which is about transcendental ideas he
writes quote this is can't in the great
wealth of our languages the thinking
mind and nevertheless often finds itself
at a loss for an expression that exactly
suits its concept and lacking this is
able to make itself rightly intelligible
neither to others nor even to itself
coining new words is a presumption to
legislate in language that rarely
succeeds and before we have recourse to
this dubious means it is advisable to
look around in a dead and learned
language to see if an expression occurs
in it that is suitable to this concept
and even if the ancient use of this
expression has become somewhat unsteady
owing to the inattentiveness of its
authors it is better to fix on the
meaning that is proper to it even if it
is doubtful whether it's always had
exactly this sense then to ruin our
Enterprise by making ourselves
unintelligible end quote I love that
from can't because this is something I
often go on about if you've been a fan
of top cast for a while you know I don't
like neologisms so I think that what
can't is saying there and that just that
short passage I'm going to come to what
he's saying about ideas is well worth
reflecting on it's good advice to Modern
thinkers today avoid coining new words
there is rarely a good reason to come up
with neologisms unless at the last you
are utterly exhausted of all other
options for one it confuses your
interlocutor who has never heard your
new word before and on the other you can
mistake inventing a word with
discovering something real which is
often my problem with people who like to
invent new words and possibly in some
cases you might be inclined perhaps to
deceive your reader that you've
discovered something new and in fact
you've done little more than what let's
say J.R.R Tolkien did when he coined the
term Hobbit he Tolkien at least totally
understood he was writing complete
fiction and was not intent on deceiving
anyone much less himself we cannot be
quite so generous with certain other
modern thinkers who profit all kinds of
new vocabulary and acronyms in order to
conjure the protein hints of deep
investigation anyway perhaps I'm being a
little mean can't does go on later in
the same passage to write and here he
gets the stuff about ideas quote this is
can't again
Plato made use of the expression idea in
such a way that we can readily see that
he understood by it something that not
only could never be borrowed from the
senses but that even goes far beyond the
concepts of the understanding with which
Aristotle occupied himself since nothing
encountered an experience could ever be
congruent to it
ideas for him are archetypes of things
themselves and not like the categories
merely the key to possible experiences
in his opinion they flowed from the
highest reason through which human
reason partakes in them our reason
however now no longer finds itself in
its original state but must call back
with toil the old now very obscure ideas
through a recollection which is called
philosophy I do not wish to go into any
literary investigation here in order to
make out the sense which the sublime
philosopher combined with his word I
note only that when we compare the
thoughts that an author expresses about
a subject in ordinary speech as well as
in writings it is not at all unusual to
find that we understand him even better
than he understood himself since he may
not have determined his concept
sufficiently and hence sometimes spoke
or even thought contrary to his own
intention end quote from cart
and so can't goes on in similar vein now
we can admit here that it may well be
that we understand some rights are
better than as Kant says he understands
himself or is equally often we may both
misunderstand the thing being written
about by that author at least to some
extent
can't hear seems to be suggesting that
Plato
understood by that word or term idea
something closer to what I'd be calling
knowledge after all here he's using that
word idea as being a thing that refers
to quote things themselves end quote but
then not all ideas refer to
things or real things at least now some
can rightly be said not to refer to
anything at all let alone two I think
itself okay so I'll nitpicky here and
it'd be good to be able to talk to Kant
about what he actually meant but let's
say for example the idea of a fairy well
the idea of a fairy is not referring to
anything real it's just an imaginary
thing so I don't know what fairies
themselves can mean as I like to say or
as I'm saying here an idea is a guess an
attempt at representing something
possible
logically possible anyway not
necessarily physically possible in any
case Kant is not being particularly
helpful for our project here he's deeply
focused on categorizing ideas but never
really grapples precisely with what
ideas are let alone where they come from
so lastly for now let me consider the
work of the great David Hume on all of
this
and Hume or for many books but in
particular he authored a book titled
an inquiry concerning human
understanding and chapter two of that
book is it's self-titled quote on the
origin of ideas end quote so that's
promising that would seem to be the
jackpot when it comes to me searching
for an answer to my original question
that being where do ideas come from
well okay so spoiler alert unfortunately
we've got to prepare for a
disappointment for although Hume is my
personal nomination for the greatest
philosopher of the 17th and 18th
centuries which I would say is a notable
achievement Among The Luminaries which
include the aforementioned Descartes and
can't but also people like Locke and
leibnitz Spinoza Berkeley Voltaire Burke
Godwin and Rousseau but then I've always
been fascinated by the question of
personhood which I think Hume made far
more sense on than any of those other
her2forementioned people so with all
that Preamble let me read sections from
of the origin of ideas and distill out
what there may be in this section of his
writing by the way it's perhaps worth
noting that John Stuart Mill he was from
the 19th century that's why he doesn't
get a mention in my my favorite
philosophers of that era okay so Hume
Hume begins in this section on of the
origin of ideas with quote this is from
Hume everyone will readily allow that
there is a considerable difference
between the perceptions of the mind when
a man feels the pain of excessive Heat
or the pleasure of moderate warmth and
when he afterwards recalls to his memory
this sensation or anticipates it by his
imagination end quote
well so everyone will readily allow us
this Hume that's a terrible appeal to
the masses well I don't know about this
I don't think everyone
for example Descartes himself had
already explained why this could not be
readily allowed yeah okay we can say
there is a difference in general between
perceiving a hot thing and remembering
that hot thing but we can never be sure
we're not hallucinating or dreaming
we're just making an error in our
recollection yet Hume goes on to say
quote these faculties May mimic or copy
the perceptions of the senses but they
never can entirely reach the force and
vivacity of the original sentiment the
utmost we say of them even when they
operate with greatest Vigor is that they
represent their object in so Lively a
manner that we could almost say we feel
or see it but accept the mind be
disordered by disease or Madness they
never can arrive at such a pitch of
vivacity as to render these perceptions
all together undistinguishable end quote
well to my mind that sounds like an
admission that the mind can indeed be
disordered but it need not be disordered
by just disease or Madness as humances
simple errors can make recalling and
experiencing sometimes confusing but
none of this is actually relevant to the
origin of ideas beyond the fact he is
trying to say he Hume he's trying to say
some perception from outside causes a
sensation in the mind okay very well he
also makes a distinction later between a
man who is angry and a man who recalls
what it is like to be angry again all
very well but none of this explains
exactly where those ideas come from only
that you've got these two categories and
that they arise in the mind and
themselves can be explained the idea of
being angry can be explained by the
events causing you know someone to be
upset and the idea of remembering anger
can be explained by recalling to mind
the sensation of what it's like to be
angry okay big deal in any case Hume
does want to divide all the contents of
the Mind into two kinds which he calls
Impressions which are perceptions like
the scolding heat of tea that is too hot
or the anger one feels when having been
robbed or assaulted let's say
so he's comparing that which uh he's
calling Impressions versus ideas which
include remembering all of those things
Hume writes on all of this quote here
therefore we may divide all the
perceptions of the Mind into two classes
or species which are distinguished by
their different degrees of force and
vivacity the less forcible and Lively
are commonly denominated thoughts or
ideas the other species want a name in
our language and in most others I
suppose because it was not requisite for
any but philosophical purposes to rank
them under a general term or appellation
let us therefore use a little freedom
and call them Impressions employing that
word in a sense somewhat different from
The Usual by the term impression then I
mean all our more lively perceptions
when we're hear or see or feel or love
or hate or desire or will and
impressions are distinguished from ideas
which are the less Lively movements
above mentioned end quote well well
that's all very imprecise to me he's
just distinguishing between the
so-called Force upon the mind of these
things so he's saying you know actually
experiencing burning your mouth is an
impression but remembering the burning
sensation well that's an idea but you
know to my mind you know just just
remember a funny joke and the first time
you heard it
I have the experience in many cases of
the so-called impression according to
Hume being identical to the so-called
idea both can elicit in me the same kind
of silly Joy over and over again with a
very long Half-Life at times
but but perhaps that is just me
and once I forget the joke or the
stand-up routine or whatever for a
little while then later on you know a
day or a week later I can recall it
again and with full force experience the
joy and the laughter again just as much
as I did the first time I heard it
that's a strange thing that I think
hume's account of what's going on here
doesn't account for uh the same is true
not just of jokes and stand-up routines
but my experience of Music the
recollection and the first experience
can sometimes have the same kind of
profound emotional experience the
impression and the idea can be conflated
here but never mind that just just
consider dreams
well are they ideas or impressions well
they can't be Impressions on hume's view
because they're coming wholly from
within and he wants to say that well
it's when the thing is coming from
without the perception that's the thing
that makes all the difference the force
or the vivacity as he is saying is
caused by something from without leaving
this impression on your mind but in a
dream the profound fear or Joy or
whatever the emotion is and The
Sensation they elicit is
indistinguishable between the dream and
reality because we only experience
reality in our minds we have to
interpret it if we interpret some mental
content as going on now then it feels
more forceful in general but if we
interpret it as having passed already
some time ago we will not experience it
as being present and forceful
look I I can recommend what Hume says on
all of this where he goes on to write
more he writes in total about 10 dense
paragraphs on this distinction between
Impressions and ideas it's worth reading
just to get the gists of what the great
man said on all of this and because it
did have an influence on what other
people have thought about this over time
but as I've already suggested prepare
for disappointment when it comes to
actually grappling with the origin of
ideas or where ideas come from that
ideas can be explained by recourse to
stuff happening out there in reality
Impressions or being recalled by memory
ideas does not actually explain how they
both arise The Impressions and the ideas
in the mind
it just says that they do I want more
than this and especially I want to know
when trying to create something new
where do those ideas come from where
does innovation come from and our New
Creations
where did Hume get the idea for his very
own work and inquiry into human
understanding
it kind of come from outside could it
but nor could it have been recalled
he seems to have missed the most
important kind of idea that is Not Mere
perception or impression as he is
calling it
nor recollection his idea of ideas but
rather a new creative thought this is
the most important kind of idea for us
to account for let's account for
solutions to our problems you know a new
composition a new Theory or explanation
and so on none of this is accounted for
by hume's writing right there of course
he does try to say admittedly later on
that you know the idea of let's say a
golden mountain is about recalling what
the term golden means and also
separately recalling what the term
Mountain means and so then creativity in
this sense is some sort of combination
of these pre-existing ideas but that's
kind of a form of pure deduction
the Hume of course was completely
trapped into thinking that ideas and
knowledge could only come either from
this kind of deduction The Logical
combination of ideas like that golden
and Mountain to give us the idea of a
golden mountain or
induction The Logical derivation of
ideas
from the senses the kind of empiricism
or from repeated observations and so on
but none of that leaves any room
whatsoever for genuine imagination and
creativity and guesswork it is an
attempt in other words to create a logic
of creativity by denying actual
creativity okay so let's move on from
the great though terribly misconceived
philosophers of that classic era let us
consider instead what it is to have an
idea as a matter of
subjectivity we can ignore reductionist
physicalist answers namely that ideas
are nothing but neural firings or some
such as we have already said this rather
misses the point if I have an idea that
begins in that form which is to say in
the form of neural firings I can write
it down onto paper and it remains an
idea for it can be passed on to anyone
who then reads the paper and has some
version of it kindled in their own mind
as they try to guess the meaning of the
scribbles on the paper but do all ideas
count as knowledge well we've already
seen that no no they they cannot let us
recall from earlier and take these
things a little bit further Now by
saying all ideas will count as a kind of
information but not all ideas are useful
so they can't possibly count as
knowledge after all knowledge is useful
information knowledge solves a problem
and that's what makes it useful not all
useful information goes on to get
replicated and so because not all
knowledge goes on to get replicated
which is to say not all knowledge counts
as a meme or as being mimetic you know
for example I might have the idea one
day of I don't know adding a teaspoon of
golden syrup to black coffee and calling
it golden coffee to myself to me this
idea becomes knowledge but if no one
else ever learns I do this it never
becomes a meme it's just some private
knowledge useful to me perhaps but it
never goes any further than that or to
belabor my Trope example from earlier
the knowledge of where I left my keys
and not for example in the lounge room
may be useful information to me that
solves a problem that I have but will
likewise never get replicated because
it's not solving anyone else's problem
and if so it's not going to be
communicated to anyone else the instant
after I pick up my keys and then go on
for the rest of my life completely
forgetting I ever had that problem the
moment I find out where my keys are
in any case all ideas or knowledge
counts as conjectural it is guests and
so we should not be surprised that the
overwhelming majority of it is false
indeed we can argue that all of it in
the final analysis must turn out to be
false as even if we think we have hit
the proverbial nail on the head in
describing or explaining reality we will
find eventually some misconception we
have or some failing in our claims about
the world electrons orbit the nucleus
turns out to be not quite right the word
orbit doesn't capture the motion of an
electron around the nucleus in the same
way that it does when you say planets
orbit the Sun
and as for orbiting the nucleus is that
perfectly correct or is the motion of
the nucleus and the electrons about some
common center of our combination of mass
and charge
my other Trope example from mathematics
that through two points a single
straight line can be drawn well that
Axiom of Euclid turns out not to be
universally correct once one understands
there exists geometries beyond that
described by a flat two-dimensional
space but this claim about the ultimate
fallaciousness of all ideas has not
allowed us to make any progress towards
answering that question which is
animating us here where do ideas come
from
they come from Minds okay very well but
how
well we just do not know how
are all ideas variations on other ideas
we've already had in the past
that seems to lead to some kind of
infinite regress stretching back in time
to if not our moment of personal
conception of our personal Consciousness
perhaps back to the first person ever
that had consciousness of some kind and
was aware of having some idea well
that's also no answer
and so I'm going to make another kind of
claim
I'm going to claim that this very
question where do ideas come from itself
contains a misconception
it cries out for an answer to do with
the source of our knowledge
in other words it's the wrong question
and they can be wrong questions consider
if I was to ask
what being designed the shape of
Australia
well the real question is what processes
led to the shape that Australia now has
in similar fashion asking about where
ideas come from is itself misleading it
points the way down a path that is an
epistemological cul-de-sac we know we
have ideas Minds have them
but we do not know how
we're not going to know how until we
know how minds work in fine detail
so for now and instead a more profitable
Avenue to begin down is to ask
what sorts of things allow creativity to
flourish
equivalently under what conditions will
better ideas arise given we know they do
arise in Minds
so let us replace the question of where
do ideas come from with
how can creativity be helped to flourish
this the astute reader or listener will
notice is but this particular author and
speaker's pale imitation of or riffing
upon just one movement in the great
Symphony of Karl Popper's epistemology
where he the original composer of all of
this wrote in his 1960 essay knowledge
without Authority
wherein he offered to the world a way
forward with quote I wish to replace the
question of the sources of our knowledge
by the entirely different question
how can we come to detect and eliminate
error end quote
and thus in exactly the same vein I wish
to replace the question of where ideas
come from by the entirely different
question how can we come to maximize
creativity maximizing creativity or
perhaps the somewhat more modest
question of better allowing creativity
to flourish simply is about most
effectively detecting and correcting or
eliminating errors
it is in the opinion of this author that
maximizing creativity happens best when
the creative entity namely a mind a
person is free
liberated from coercion and nurtured
with good health and reasonable wealth
to be able to explore the space of ideas
this takes time and freedom
those are the ingredients
we cannot say where the ideas will come
from but that they might better flourish
in a garden of Freedom given the passage
of time and the watering of good health
and the sunlight of reasonable wealth is
all we can say for now
time to explore energy to reflect and no
shadow of coercion upon the process
might best allow the person to maximize
their creativity
this does not mean Solutions will come
but rather that the opportunity that
they present themselves is greater than
when compared to a situation where time
is being restricted unnecessarily or a
person is coerced into thinking about
things they would prefer not to such as
poor health or the inability to pay
their bills or know where the next meal
is coming from or concerns about the
welfare of their loved ones let's say it
is well known for example that Isaac
Newton sequestered away during a
pandemic authored his principia
Mathematica
Albert Einstein did much of his best
work outside of mainstream Academia
while gainfully employed but with
seemingly quite an amount of Freedom day
to day to explore his ideas but on the
other hand we must also admit that at
times a sense of urgency can help
a goal in place to manufacture a vaccine
or get to the moon or first construct
the fission or fusion bomb
so perhaps only sometimes for some
people does Splendid isolation work so
well other times the buzz of a motivated
team is the Fertile ground that allows
ideas to germinate Sprout and then
become a veritable Forest of flourishing
originality people are different one
from another and so the best
prescription is often simply to ask them
what works best for them if you want
something out of them or who just wish
to help them be their best so you can be
your best contemplatives meditators and
those practiced in careful introspection
and exploration of their own minds have
long known that ideas seem to Simply
arise in consciousness
this is quite consistent with the
papyrian view that everything in our
minds is an interpretation we are Minds
the things that have ideas or the create
ideas that form ideas and so on but
ideas are themselves interpretations
we are what have ideas we are what
create them and criticize them so as to
refine and improve them
that's the way we find Solutions but no
solution or idea is identical to us the
mind the creative conjecturing guessing
thing we are is itself unchanging but
provides new content all the time
the empty stage is itself unchanged even
though casts crew and set Pieces come
and go the mind and its contents are
different things ideas as I have said
are abstractions that capture
possibility
they arise only for most of them to pass
away criticized and lost to the vacuum
of unconsciousness again
if I am right that ideas come from the
equivalent of something like a mind
singularity
then all this is saying is that what we
know so far of epistemology fails to
account for their creation and thus the
question of where do ideas come from
when given the answer a singularity in
the mind is just another way of saying
our best explanation right now is silent
on the matter as to where ideas come
from but what it is not silent on is how
best to allow more and better ideas to
arise in general that is a state
completely divorced from coercion and
liberal with time devoted to thinking
for then conjectures can arise and
conjectures criticizing those
conjectures can also arise and the whole
wheel of progress turns and Improvement
comes on not inevitably
but nonetheless relentlessly for now
I have an idea I should turn this whole
article into a podcast
for you go enjoy creating criticizing
and considering some new ideas
that's what you are
and that's what you do
if you've enjoyed or at all found any of
this content useful please consider
supporting me on patreon to find the
links to this go to
www.brethall.org thank you for any and
all support
until next time bye-bye
[Music]
oh